Overview of analysis projects
Three preferences can be given regarding the projects which will be assigne based on skill levels
The aim is performing a complete analysis on real-life data sets, facing everyday problems in data analysis. In the final weeks we have to present the results to peers, explaining what has been done and which results have been obtained. It is not necessary to achieve the final results, to reach the goal but to do stuff properly and learning as much as possible.
Exercise classes become the project-hours where assistants are availbale for questions.

%% Collision projects %%
1. Astrophysics with Magic experiment: focus on gamma rays (photons do not feel any EM field while reaching us from their source) coming from Crab Nebola, the remaining of a supernova explosion. Data comes from a telescope collecting gamma rays. Gamma rays are unaffected before reaching our atmosphere, where they produce a shower of particles, which emit Cherenckov light (cone-shaped). What is measured is the Cherenkov light coming from the particle of the shower. The shape of signal is different than the shape of the background. We have to understand the difference in shape between different originating particles, proposing a selection criteria to select gamma rays over hadrons. Ultimately we have to evaluate the differential energy spectrum of the gamma rays

2. Dimuon events at CMS: CMS is a collection of detectors that work together to form a general purpose detector. Focus on Z resonance in the spectrum of the invariant mass of two muons

3. psi(2S) discovery using large statistic data set (and optionally a low statistic one). There are two bumps, the J/psi bump and the excited psi(2S) bump. The aim is to find the cross section of the smaller bump by performing a likelihood test. For the low statistic sample the goal is simply to put an upper limit on the cross section value (pretending not to know the value found with highs statistic)

4. Higgs->gamma+gamma parametric fitting to extract the resonance due to the Higgs boson in the two photons processes. The two photons are used to compute the invariant mass, starting point of the project. Only the events that have two photons are selected. The signal arises from two hadrons colliding, gluon-gluon interaction resulting in top loop that produces the Higgs, which decays with another top loop in two photons. The background comes from hadron-hadron interaction producing directly two photons; the bkg has a cross section that is order of magnitudes larger than the signal. We will have to build the model first, using as signal_bkg ratio the values predicted by the standard model times a factor that is fitted (if SM is right, it should be 1). Factor in some systematics that will increase the overall uncertainty on the estimated parameters. Finally, there are other processes (lower cross section) that can still produce H bosons, coming from the fusion of two weak bosons; the goal is to split the signal into the two production channels.

%% Cosmology projects %%
5. Dark energy with supernovae: we have a good theoretical prediction on the explosion of SN so we can infer how far they are looking at their brightness. Bunch of unknown stuff, I really don't understand. The methods will be presented in the lectures btw.

6. KiDS telescope: the light coming from distant galaxies is distorted because of other massive objects in between. From the distortion we can infer information on the gravitational potential they go through. The goal is obtaining the power spectrum (not evaluated all in one go but with subsequent annihilations). Damn she's so bad at explaining

7. Dark matter maps using deep learning methods: simulation-based inference methods (will be touched during the lecture) where the simulations replace the theoretical prediction. Any summary statistics (bins, ...) can be used to compare the measured data with the simulated ones. The simulations themselves are very expensive computationally-wise but we will do easier ones, compare different summary statistics with the ultimate goal of creating automatic feature extraction (design algorithm that finds the best summary statistic to use; this is done using a Convolutionary Neural Network) and infer constraints on cosmological constants? Bho
